Chapter 1

The way of the program

The goal of this book is to teach you to think like a computer scientist. This
way of thinking combines some of the best features of mathematics, engineering,
and natural science. Like mathematicians, computer scientists use formal
languages to denote ideas (specifically computations). Like engineers, they
design things, assembling components into systems and evaluating tradeoffs among
alternatives. Like scientists, they observe the behavior of complex systems,
form hypotheses, and test predictions.

The single most important skill for a computer scientist is problem solving.
Problem solving means the ability to formulate problems, think creatively about
solutions, and express a solution clearly and accurately. As it turns out, the
process of learning to program is an excellent opportunity to practice
problem-solving skills. That's why this chapter is called,
"The way of the program".

On one level, you will be learning to program, a useful skill by itself. On
another level, you will use programming as a means to an end. As we go along,
that end will become clearer.

1.1 What is a program?

A program is a sequence of instructions that specifies how to perform a
computation. The computation might be something mathematical, such as solving a
system of equations or finding the roots of a polynomial, but it can also be a
symbolic computation, such as searching and replacing text in a document or
something graphical, like processing an image or playing a video.

The details look different in different languages, but a few basic instructions
appear in just about every language:

input: Get data from the keyboard, a file, the network, or some other device.

output: Display data on the screen, save it in a file, send it over the network,
etc.

math: Perform basic mathematical operations like addition and multiplication.
conditional execution: Check for certain conditions and run the appropriate code.


Excerpt from "Think Python, How to Think Like a Computer Scientist"
By Allen Downey
Published by Green Tea Press
Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported (CC BY-NC 3.0)
